we'll turn back to the United States now
the situation there and there's growing
pressure against the Biden
Administration to hold Israel
accountable we'll now speak to Lise de
who's a human rights lawyer she's
joining us uh from New York Lise de good
to have you with us in Al jazer thanks
for your time so Ezra is saying you're
an attorney and you recently said that
you and others have filed a quote notice
and demand with us members of Congress
that they will be prosecuted in criminal
court for the US's role in war on Gaza I
wonder if you can just elaborate on that
a little bit and tell us what this
notice in deband actually
means certainly first of all I think
it's important that people understand
that genocide constitutes the highest
crime punishable under the Geneva
conventions and under the Rome statute
and it is not Just for participating in
a genocide but for aiding abetting and
inciting genocide and the Geneva
Convention also maintains that
governments who adopt the convention on
genocide are to legislate against it and
what we've been seeing in the US is
clearly now as we're hearing reports of
us boots on the ground inside and even
before whether it was diplomatic cover
political and financial cover and
support as well as incitement quite
frankly um all of these are punishable
under the Rome statute and countries all
over the world have in fact adopted by
way of universal jurisdiction um these
laws into their home uh their home
country's laws their National laws and
so the prosecution uh whether it's
criminal or civil um or otherwise uh is
available uh to people who do want to
bring them outside of the us. and not
just in the IC this demand actually was
inspired by a colleague of mine ra J Who
noted that that this we drafted it in
advance of the vote on the military aid
package um to Israel and it was our hope
that it would have some sort of impact
in advance of that clearly that was not
the case um nonetheless we do believe
that these efforts now moving forward
for Palestine and for other situations
um should be a powerful notice um of
what lies ahead for people who continue
to breach the uh Geneva conventions and
the Rome statutes I mean what impact do
you do you think this will actually have
lamise de because up until now what we
see uh coming out of the US is only six
out of the 535 members of uh the uh
American Congress have actually endorsed
the ceasefire and we also see that uh
the silencing that's going on of the
only Palestinian congresswoman Rashid
who's in Congress so it really sounds
like it's a tough road ahead to change
um minds and attitudes in the US isn't
it yeah I I think you're absolutely
right I think nonetheless what we saw
almost immediately was a shift in
discourse that people were being more
cognizant especially after journalists
had raised um the notice and demand
letter during the state department press
briefings do we think that it will
change you as policy and their their
sense that they are completely immune no
not in the immediate future not at this
very moment um I do want to just add
that neither public nor private uh
officials and persons are immune under
the J conventions and the Rome statute
for aiding abetting and inciting
genocide by the way so while it will
take some time we are certain it will
take some time to actually see results
um we do expect to see results if not in
the US so certainly we don't expect to
see results in the US but outside of the
US I think that's number one I think
number two it is making people think
just a little bit U more than they would
and and feel a sense of accountability
and number three I think it's a powerful
political and legal messaging
Palestinians have been begging the
international order and the UN for 75
years to implement Law and Order and I
think the notion that people are aware
that we can begin taking some modum of
accountability and Law and Order into
our own hands has really mobilized what
is a mushrooming force in support of
this work from investigators forensics
um to plaintiffs to jurisdictions to
jurists and lawyers truly all over the
world who are preparing for this work we
are very hopeful about the outcomes yeah
I mean do you do you um do you think
that there will be accountability and
justice for the Palestinians because as
you've said they've gone to
International bodies and institutions
and these places are are put they're
supposed to sort of prevent atrocities
from taking place and they're supposed
to prevent war crimes and genocide but
but they have failed to do so when it
comes to the
Palestinians yeah I our hopes do not lie
in in the international institutions
themselves but in third state
jurisdictions and other courts where Law
and Order is more uh effectively and
meaningfully implemented at least as
regards these issues we do expect to see
some progress and we're not just basing
it on universal jurisdiction and
international humanitarian law that is
one body of Law and one aspect that we
are pursuing but rather we are also
looking at dual Nationals at
transactions at Financial assets at
Transmissions media transmissions and
otherwise that are happening across the
world passing state lines and therefore
likely subject to various regulatory
governmental administrative laws which
are being violated um at this moment and
which might be subject to some type of
legal action by the third state
governments so actually we are hopeful
we have been assessing this um we don't
think it's a lost cause at this point
certainly the international forums from
the ICC and if somebody were to bring
before the icj and the UN have not only
failed the Palestinian people but I
would go further and say that they have
explicitly betrayed them um especially
given the US's veto power at the at the
UN Security Council we are hopeful that
we have many friendly governments um
across the world who are willing to take
that next step and bring some justice
some accountability and therefore
disincentivize this from further not
just inside Palestine but for other
people in the future all right we thank
you so much l de for joining us from New
York thank
you